After the war, when things kind of settled down, you moved to this house in 19... We built it in 1950.
All right.
After that, did you walk home to lunch?
Or did you eat on campus?
Well, between the time that Georgeville got a place to live, we lived up on Fairview, 301.
Then I'd walk home for lunch.
Okay.
And then, but this is a little further, and I'd probably take the lunch, but I had a car then.
And, of course, when George Bell, she had the car in Kansas City, and people just had one car back in those days.
Sure, sure.
The, after the war, as things settled down in 47-8, about how many were in the department, how many faculty?
You know, I thought you might ask me that.
I thought I'd better look at it.
I can tell you how many were on the faculty in 1967 when I became department here.
There were 13 faculty members in 1967, but there was a very rapid growth from after the war.
We had a lot of veterans come back.
We had the GI Bill of Rights.
In fact, I went to Penn State on the GI Bill of Rights and finished my doctorate up there.
At that time, I was the only person on the faculty who had a doctorate.
All right, so let's trace that.
You got out of the service about when?
I got out of the service in August of 1946.
I could have gotten out of the service earlier, but I had to wait until fall semester so I wouldn't be off the payroll.
I had enough leave accumulated.
Did you come back here and begin?
I came back here and started teaching for the fall semester.
And when did you go to Penn State?
I went to Penn State in the summer times.
Oh.
So you were on the faculty here?
Nine months and Penn State three months.
Okay.
Make believe that you were explaining to a young person today what those GI veterans were like as students, those after 1946, 7, 8.
They were very serious.
They were very mature.
They'd been through a lot.
They had families, a lot of them did, and they were very mature, very, very serious.
And that changed the complexion of A&M quite a bit, because they weren't kids coming to college.
And during that time, we also started something else.
We started a PhD degree, pushing hubby through, because a lot of them were married, and every department had a wives' club.
So we had a PE wives' club.
Animal Science had an Animal Science Wives Club, and one of the faculty wives would be a sponsor, and Georgia Bell was the sponsor for our club, and they were very active.
We'd have a program for them every month, and then when their husband graduated, we had a ceremony and gave the wife a Ph.T.
diploma, which was the exact duplicate of the A&M diploma, except the wording was different.
Oh, how good, how good.
They lived, most of those veterans lived where?
A&M did more than any school in the United States for returning veterans.
We had, of course, we had the project houses here at the south part of the campus.
We turned those into homes for veterans, four apartments in each one.
And then we brought in barracks from different camps around to have at the North Gate.
And they had one room, one bedroom apartment, was $28 a month, all utilities paid.
Two bedrooms, $32 a month, all utilities paid.
So they really did a lot for veterans.
Were there also some trailers or other auxiliary down there?
Yes, there were little Quonset huts.
There were little Quonset huts where the tennis courts are now, some of the tennis courts.
Did they have a, did that have a nickname?
What was that area called?
Was that just Vet Village?
I don't really remember.
And those were hard-working people.
Then the enrollment went back down and kind of leveled off.
Yes.
All right.
When Gilchrist becomes chancellor, who were some other key leaders in the late, in the 50s here at A&M?
Presidents, deans?
Okay.
There was Morgan, was the president.
Now, we had several acting presidents.
Bolton was an acting president for a while, or maybe he was a temporary appointment, I don't know.
And he was, primarily, he had been dean of engineering?
Dean of engineering and dean of the A&M College.
Oh, okay.
And then there was Williams.
He had been dean of the School of Agriculture.
And see, after Williams, I think there was Morgan, probably.
I can't name these and my memory's gone.
But there was Morgan who came out of Wisconsin.
And there was a kind of a problem with Morgan because I know that he moved out of the president's house and moved into a garage apartment.
Then he went back to Michigan.
He came from Michigan.
I've heard in general that he wanted to make some changes, maybe some of those that later would be made.
That's right.
But at that point the board wasn't in harmony with it.
Yes.
Do you remember any first impressions of Earl Rudder?
Yes, I guess for the first time that we really got to see, he came here as dean of engineering.
No, no, that was Gilchrist did that.
But Rudder came here as president.
I think he was titled for the first few months, was executive vice president, but clearly he was going to be president.
That's right.
And Harrington was president.
Now, Rudder is not a second place man.
Did you get that impression early on?
Pretty early.
And when he came, of course he was president, but he was the man in charge.
And you had, at that time when he was president, you had a chain of command.
Things went through a chain of command.
Your faculty member didn't go to the president.
He went up the chain, and he came down the chain.
Now was that?
more rigid then than it had been?
I think so.
It was more military type.
Okay.
And soon after he got here, Frank Hubert then came as Dean of Arts and Sciences.
Yes.
And before Dean Hubert was Dean of Arts and Sciences, there was Dr. Oh, he was head of the Geography Department.
Skip Schlesinger.
Skip, that's right.
He was dean of the College of Arts and Sciences.
You see, because when I came there were only four colleges.
Right.
And the arts and sciences covered everything there was in agriculture or engineering or veterinary medicine.
Now, did you people in arts and sciences feel that agriculture and engineering dominated the decision making?
Oh, there wasn't any question.
But that was the tone of the state.
And of that, here on the campus, when Dean Kyle was here, Dean Kyle dominated.
Oh, really?
Yes.
Now, I know, I've not asked anybody, describe Dean Kyle by... I couldn't because I didn't know him that well.
I knew of him more than I knew him.
But what did he look like physically?
He was kind of a small man, and I really don't have that much recollection of him.
Because I understand that...
One of the reasons the football stadium got the name it did is that he made it clear it was his agriculture land that he was allowing them for getting them to use.
Right.
That it wasn't A&M's, it was agriculture's.
Yes.
That, that, that, that would pretty well it describes him.
Let's see.
Let me jump to the students.
All right.
In your classes, did you feel much difference in the capability
of the ag, the engineering, the arts and sciences students?
Not really.
Were there supposedly better students in one area than the other?
Well, of course, there were better students in any department.
Yeah, right, but I mean there wasn't.
But not in the college as a whole, as you take the college as a whole.
What was a typical Aggie student's manner and style like in that era?
Of course, they were all in the Corps.
All in the Corps.
They had a rank in the Corps, and they pretty well followed that, but they were outgoing, maybe a little close on the edge of being, since it was an all-male school, a little close on the edge of being kind of rowdy.
But they were all well-behaved.
Wasn't difficult for you to get
to get a class to be orderly?
No, no.
You had it very easy, very easy.
Now, most of the students in your classes were what class year?
Well, when I was teaching in the required program, most of them would be in the freshman or sophomore year.
Okay.
But a lot of them would be taking it as an elective 301 and 302.
But they were very easily controlled.
They had never had any problem at all with discipline.
And their class attendance was regular?
Yes, very regular.
Did, do you remember any kinds of pranks or jokes that they attempted that you remember?
Jokes or pranks at anybody?
I can remember some humorous occasions because they had the, they had the movie in Guy and Hall.
And that was another thing that made the campus very, very close, because Mr. Putty was the guy that ran Guy and Hall.
And the kids, like our children, never paid to get in to see a movie.
He would give them flyers to distribute, then sack popcorn or something to get in free.
And so that really brought us together as a very, very close community.
But the students, I can remember, and these were two of my students,
They both went on to be very successful.
But we're having one of these movies where there are sword fights, you know, in them.
And so they come across from Guy and Hall.
They were on the stage.
So they come across in front of the screen with a sword fight.
And, you know, there'd be things like that that would happen.
But there wasn't anything bad happened.
I don't recall anything, pranks where there was anything.
Was there ever anything in one of your classes?
a prank that they attempted on another student?
No, I can't recall one.
I might be a bin, but I don't recall one.
And did they ever attempt any pranks in a faculty member's yard or?
I can't remember one.
Nobody's car ever got painted?
No.
I've never heard of that.
I've never heard of any damage being done to any faculty member's home or any pranks being done.
I've heard a lot of drowned outs.
Oh, that was on the dorm, yeah.
On the campus.
Yeah, that was on the dorm, on each other.
All right, let's see.
Back to the, your, who were your dearest colleagues in your department, the ones that you cherished the most?
Well, of course, Mr. Dow, because he was my college prof.
And his daughter's like an adopted daughter, like a second daughter to us.
And she has a son here at A&M now that's a freshman.
Then Carl Tischler and, of course, Mr. Penny.
And then Colonel Frank Andy Anderson.
The first people that have George Bell and I over to the house for dinner was Colonel and Mrs. Andy Anderson.
Please share some information about them.
Well, Colonel Andy was a man, it's right or it's wrong, you know.
And he was too old.
He was a colonel, a full colonel.
He was called into active duty, and they said, you're too old to go to combat.
He says, I won't out.
And there wasn't a man probably in the combat unit that was as good a man as he was.
Because he was, at his age of 50 or whatever he was, he was in tremendous shape.
He could have outfought any... But he still didn't get... He didn't get to go, so he'd come back to the university.
See, he'd been commandant here too.
And those two then... Describe Colonel Andy physically.
Kern Andrew was a small, very well-built man.
Very well-built man.
And he coached track?
He coached track.
And he was also assistant football coach for a while.
But he coached track forever, didn't he?
Yes.
Had some very winning teams.
Yes, yes.
And did they live on campus?
They did, but when we came, they had already moved off the campus and lived over in Fairview, just down a few houses from where we were living.
And so he was in the Department of Physical Education?
Physical Education.
All right.
Any younger dear colleagues?
Give me a think, let me think.
Oh yeah, Mameliga.
Amo Mameliga was a very close friend.
He was a man that could diagnose if you had something hurting you or you had a limp or muscles hurting you.
He was better than anybody I've ever known.
I've never known anyone, doctor or anyone else, that was good at diagnosing and correcting his mammalica.
Now, what was his teaching area?
His teaching area was kinesiology, and he also had charge of our remedial program.
Now, I remembered him as the head trainer, don't I?
No, he was over in our department.
They sent a lot of people with injuries over to him for rehabilitation.
Okay, maybe that was it.
Because I got a real bad charley horse one time as a young faculty member.
Yeah, this injured him.
And I went over and he told me what to do and it worked.
Yeah, he wasn't a trainer.
He was on, but he's, that was, and, you know, now he had, he had trained the trainers.
He had, he was in charge of, you know, the trainer program.
It was in the rehabilitation.
Other than Colonel Andy, were there other coaches who were full-time members of the department?
During the war, Ray Putnam was.
He was an economics prof, but during the war, he was a full-time physical education man.
He was assistant track coach.
Where were y'all housed?
When I came here, you know, there was Old DeWare.
Okay, you know that little building that's just on this side of where DeWare Fieldhouse was?
That was the athletic department.
And so was the offices on the east side of Dewar Fieldhouse.
That was athletic offices also.
And our offices were back, as you went down the steps from Dewar Fieldhouse, just a few steps, there was kind of a dressing room on the right.
As you come into Dewar Fieldhouse, there was an office on the right.
It was just a small office.
Secretary in there and
Where did y'all meet your courses, those courses that were in the lecture hall?
I'll tell you what.
We met those in a lecture hall in a room which was on the south side of Dewar.
And during a football game, it was a dressing room.
And we'd come back in there on Monday, and there'd be shoulder pads and so forth all over the room.
And it was right next to the, it was right next to the, where they passed out the equipment and so forth.
So that was the visiting team's dressing area?
No, the visiting team's dressing area was under Kyle Field.
Oh, okay.
So you're saying a home dressing?
That was a home dressing.
My, my, my.
Now, let's see.
Classes began at 8 o'clock.
Yeah.
And you had sometimes afternoon classes until pretty close to 5 o'clock.
Pretty close to 5 o'clock.
And then on Saturdays, 8 till noon.
Right.
And so on a football game day, home game, people were looking at their watches, I'll bet, in the 11 to 12 class.
Well, they pretty well take care of those.
You know, they were all gone by the time we get from all over the campus, you know.
In your early years, did anyone ever ask you either in fact
or by inference about the fact that you hadn't gone to A&M, but you were on the faculty here?
There were a lot of faculty members who were former A&M students, a lot of them.
No one ever brought that up.
No one ever questioned if you were an Aggie or anything?
No.
All right.
Now, when I got here with a Rice PhD and an undergraduate degree from Austin College, I was comparatively negative about A&M.
But after five or six years, the roots got really, really deep, and our attachment grew, and that's why we've decided to spend the rest of our days here.
How long did it take you to begin to feel like A&M was part of your soul?
Well, I had always wanted to teach in college, and A&M was one of the places I wanted to teach.
And I got this call, got that call from Mr. Penberthy, and there wasn't any second thoughts in my mind.
That's where I wanted to go.
And so when I got here, there was a very warm faculty group that met and greeted me very warmly and I couldn't have been, I was real happy from the word go.
Now did you ever, in your professional career, did you ever, were you ever tempted by an offer elsewhere that caused you to have to think about it?
I had an offer from other places, one or two, but not a whole lot of them, but I never was tempted.
I had decided this is where I wanted to spend the rest of my life.
This was home.
It was just so warm, the community was warm, the university was just what I was hoping it would be, and it was just where I wanted to be home.
All right, let's go chronologically back to when Rudder got here.
in the late 50s.
Did you sense very early that things were going to be a little different, that there was going to be some changing with Rudder?
Yes.
We'd have a faculty meeting at the first year, at the first of the year, in Cain Hall.
Do you remember those?
And Earl Rudder says, you know, during the 60s, particularly during the 60s, and there were unrest on many campuses throughout the country.
And he made it very clear.
He says, now we brought you here because you're an expert in your field to teach your field.
We did not bring you here to run the university.
And, you know, there's another quote that's given to him, if you don't like it, Highway 6 runs north and south.
I don't know where, I can't remember where he said that or not.
Well, you see, when I, as a junior faculty member, at first heard some of that.
Yeah.
That was recent.
I was a little bit turned off.
Yeah.
Then later, I began to say, no, I agree with him.
I understand.
The, early in the 60s, there was a committee.
When did you come?
59.
the Aspirations Committee was appointed faculty and staff to, and I happened to be a junior member of it, and by being the junior member, I got to be the secretary, therefore right and forth.
Do you remember any feeling about co-education and non-compulsory core among you and your faculty friends?
What was the first reaction?
I don't think any of them were opposed to it.
I think it presented a problem to us, because it presented a problem to the campus.
There were no ladies' restrooms.
Right.
Except for secretaries.
And that didn't take, you know, very many stalls.
They were few and far between, yeah?
Yes.
And of course it presented a problem to us because we didn't have dressing facilities.
But what we did, we used the visiting basketball team's dressing room for a girl's dressing room.
Really?
Yeah.
In G. Raleigh?
In G. Raleigh.
I didn't know that.
Yeah.
Do you remember any kinds of accidents, goofy problems, or anything with the coming of coeducation?
No.
Do you remember any faculty member having said something that for an all-male audience was okay, but for a female audience it wasn't?
No, I never really did.
I heard a few stories in veterinary medicine of certain faculty members that for years and years had been giving various biological examples of this or that, and it didn't work quite well, quite as well.
I heard the same stories.
and a few storytellers.
Let's see.
Did Dean Hubert change arts and sciences any when he came, as you recall?
Dean Hubert was a very good administrator, very good.
I think he probably took over a little more command of the position.
It became more of a, that you talk to Dean Hubert about things.
Skipper wasn't, you know, administratively, he wasn't.
Now, who was the department head in the early 60s for you?
Carl Tischler.
Oh, Carl.
Okay.
And he was department head 10, 12 years?
He was the department head until I became department head.
Okay.
So he was the department head from the time that Finberthy
Went up as dean of men until I became department head.
I was the third department head in the department.
Describe his style and manner of leading.
Very easygoing, very quiet, easygoing, very meticulous.
When he left his office, everything on top of his desk was exactly so, but he was very easygoing.
And one or two times in departmental meetings, if I had been department head, I would have told somebody to shut up, but he didn't.
He was just very easygoing.
He's a very well-mannered person.
He was a gentleman.
All right.
My mind jumps to an old conversation with Fred Benson.
I was talking to him about faculty-family interaction.
Yeah.
When you and your wife and other faculty families got together, were there any unwritten rules about do's and don'ts?
No.
Did people smoke indoors at those faculty get-togethers?
Yes, I guess.
Was it acceptable for a woman to smoke?
Yes.
Now, there are certain women that smoked, but I don't remember any of the women on our wives that smoked.
Was it okay to serve wine?
No.
He told me it wasn't okay to play cards with the shades open, that if you had a card game, you closed the shades.
We didn't play many cards.
We played 42.
That was acceptable.
What other entertainments were there?
Well, we played other cards like Old Maid and there's another game where you collect a lot of things you bid and I can't remember the name of those things.
Well, that's not the one I'm thinking about where you
Anyway, there's a lot of interaction between the players.
A lot of interaction between the players.
Georgeville would remember the name, but I don't.
Who were, for you and your wife, who were your closest faculty friends?
Well, we were close friends with the Tishers, the Dows, and then, of course, all of our friends through church were members of the faculty also.
Okay.
Who were some of them?
The Sorensons, Romy Sorensen, he was in ag engineering.
And the pots, and he was in chemistry.
And the streets, he was engineering graphics.
And I will tell you, Haskell,
My recall on things was pretty bad.
All right.
If a student came to you and wanted some general academic advice, who would you have recommended that student go to?
We didn't have anybody at first except, you know, yourself.
Right, but.
Because the faculty members did the, did the advising.
But we didn't have a, well, we did, we had a, oh, up in the,
Up across from Guyon Hall, we had, across from Sabisa Hall, we had a department that, which kind of service, I can't remember the names.
Austin Curley and his crew?
Austin Curley, yes, and his crew, that's right.
And then, see, when I got here, there were associate or assistant deans like Dick Potts,
There was somebody at Randall in engineering.
Yes, there was kind of the student advisor that handled student problems.
When did, now, you all added the doctoral program in, and was it then Health and Physical Education?
Yes.
Now, you see, we changed the name of our department because at first,
If you were certified to teach physical education, health was just a part of it.
Then it became a separate deal.
I don't remember just the exact year that it was divided, but then we changed the name of the department to Health and Physical Education.
I'd say we had 13 members when I became as department head.
And when I retired, we had 55.
55?
Yes.
So that's from 60?
67.
To 79.
12 years.
Wow.
And your hardest job as a department head was finding qualified faculty members.
All right.
Let's talk about that in a minute.
Where did you...
How did you go about finding those?
Well, most of the cases, we advertised in the professional journals.
And then I went to the professional meetings, and I listed jobs there, and I interviewed people there.
And through those avenues is where we found most of our- You also knew some key people to call.
to get direct information, didn't you?
Didn't you have some acquaintances you knew you could trust?
Oh, yes.
Yes, that's when we would find a person we thought was qualified.
We'd call people.
And by the same token, when I was in charge of our majors before I became department head, I never had a graduate that I did not find a job for.
It may not be where he wanted to be,
exactly the job he wanted, but I knew so many people over in administration over the state that I could call and place an individual.
But we used the same procedure in hiring.
Yes.
Now, with coeducation, the courses had to change a good bit.
Go on.
Talk about that, please.
Well, it is.